Error message guideline (#2793)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/dev/error-message.md

> # Error message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Error Message
```

Elektra has a lot of developers and hence the error messages vary in how they are written.
This guideline should unify the message format so that users will get consistent error messages.

> - All error messages start with a capital letter. The only exception are quoted messages at the start such as "'xxxx-xxxx' is an invalid syntax".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All error messages start with a capital letter. The only exception are quoted messages at the start such as "'xxxx-xxxx' is syntactically incorrect".
```

>   If you reference a method name such as `kdbSet()` in the first word, surround it with single quotes.

Reviewer 2: For consistencies sake we should either always or never surround method names with quotes. I also can't think of a sentence that cannot be reformulated such that it doesn't start with a method name.

>   Try to avoid variable strings at the start of the sentence ("%s"-strings) if possible because you cannot guarantee capital casing.

Reviewer 2: Again I think we could require that a sentence has to be reworded, so it doesn't start with variable strings.

> - **Always** provide the errno if possible. If possible use `strerror_r` for writing out the message because it is thread safe.

Reviewer 3: I like the guideline that errno is always passed to the user. But always using `strerror_r` is very tedious.

As errno should be only relevant for resource errors, you could simply have a macro for resource errors with file name and errno.

> - If you can provide an errno, write `"Reason: %s", strerror(errno)` at the end of the error message. Also end the preceding sentence with a dot.

Reviewer 3: Again: strerror should not be recommended to be used.

Author: So should we completely avoid errno now as long as no thread safe possibility is there or what exactly should be done?

Reviewer 3: Ideally you would immediately fix it as the strerror are very prominent in your big PR.

Alternatively, you can fix it later (as it should be quite easy to grep for them and remove them all).

For this guideline, I would say something more general anyway, something like:

"Always report all information which could be useful for the user. For some error types, templates are provided to not forget something."

See also #2697

Author: I do not want to incorporate another change into the big PR. I might do it later.
I will change the sentence accordingly

> - If you can provide an errno, write `"Reason: %s", strerror(errno)` at the end of the error message. Also end the preceding sentence with a dot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you can, provide an errno. Write `"Reason: %s", strerror(errno)` at the end of the error message. Also end the preceding sentence with a dot.
```

>   Example: `"XY failed. Reason: %s", strerror(errno)`. Alternatively you can also embed it into a standard text: `"XY failed because of %s", strerror(errno)`.

Reviewer 2: I think we should always use `"... Reason: %s"`, this is also easy to implement with a special macro. An actual sentence might sound very weird or even become unintelligible because you never really now what `strerror` will return.

> - The last sentence (or single sentence of your message if you just provide one) must not end with a dot. This should encourage users to continue reading

Reviewer: I do not think I like that style very much. In my opinion, sentences should always end with a dot.

Author: I agree but honestly I rarely have seen error messages in applications which end with a dot. Also it is kind of counterintuitive to write dots at the end of error messages.

  if other messages appear.

> - If your message has multiple sentences, separate them with dots and start with a capital letter like you would do in the normal english language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If your message has multiple sentences, separate them with dots and start with a capital letter like you would do in the normal English language.
```

- Short but many sentences are preferable over long ones.

> - Avoid abbreviations because not everybody will know them. You can write the abbreviation though in brackets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use abbreviations and acronyms with care. Not everybody will know them. You can write them in brackets though.
```

Very common ones like `XML` should be fine (also `YAML` is hard to avoid as it stands for `YAML Ain't Markup Language`).

>   (eg. "No Byte Order Mark (BOM) found" instead of "No BOM found").

Reviewer 3: :+1:

- Never use exclamation marks at the end of sentences.
- If it is unclear where embedded strings in error messages start and end ("%s"-strings), surround them by single quotes '.

>   Sentences containing an errno and end with `Reason: %s` do not need extra quotes because it is clear where they start and end.

Reviewer 3: Please add a full example that fulfills all criteria and show how it will be rendered.
